feat: add release blog post for drogue cloud 0.9 (#29)
drogue-iot/blog.drogue.io: content/2022-03-21-drogue-cloud-zero-nine/index.md

+++
title = "Drogue Cloud: Release 0.9.0"
extra.author = "ctron"
description = "Drogue Cloud 0.9.0 comes with a bunch of new features, and finally cleans up two major nuisances."
+++

A lot has happened since the last release of Drogue Cloud. Unfortunately, the only thing that seems to stick out
is the ongoing war in Ukraine. And whatever you think might have led to this, there is never, ever a justification
for bombing the civilian population of a country. So, in a situation like that, can we simply celebrate what we achieved
in Drogue IoT, like we usually do? I believe the answer to that must be "yes". Do what you think is right, but also
focus on the positive! Because otherwise the terrorists have won!

<!-- more -->

## Application monitoring: Metrics and Tracing

> I am not sure, I need to advertise the benefits of application monitoring. We wanted to have that for a while. Not only

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I am not sure if I need to advertise the benefits of application monitoring. We wanted to have that for a while. Not only
```

as a feature, but actually for using that ourselves in our public sandbox. And, as we have been testing performance and
throughput, having metrics and tracing comes in handy too.

Drogue Cloud 0.9 exposes metrics using a Prometheus endpoint and supports tracing with Jaeger tracing out of the box.
When it comes to tracing, we not only support Jaeger, but we are tapping into the Rust ecosystem of
[tracing](https://tracing.rs/tracing/) and [opentelemetry](https://docs.rs/opentelemetry/latest/opentelemetry/).
However, that doesn't come out-of-the-box.

## Digital twin: Early Eclipse Ditto™ integration

Drogue Cloud's current focus is on IoT connectivity. But we definitely want to have an (optional)
integration with a digital twin component too. So, why not go ahead and bring together Drogue Cloud and
[Eclipse Ditto](https://eclipse.org/ditto/)?

Eclipse Ditto is an open source digital twin solution, and sounds like a perfect fit. Bringing those two together took

> a bit of an effort, and isn't finished until now. This will be a topic, that for sure spans over multiple releases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a bit of an effort, and isn't fully finished yet. This will be a topic, that for sure spans over multiple releases.
```

you can:

* Enable an application in Drogue Cloud for Ditto
  * This will set up the connection between Drogue Cloud and Ditto
  * And create the necessary policies
* Enable devices in Drogue Cloud to be mapped to Eclipse Ditto
  * Which creates matching "things" in Ditto
  * And applies the correct policy
* Delete resources on the Drogue Cloud side, which will synchronize this with the Ditto side

You can track the remaining items here: [drogue-iot/drogue-cloud#223](https://github.com/drogue-iot/drogue-cloud/issues/223)

Is Eclipse Ditto the only thing that we have in mind? No. Ditto is a powerful beast. But it also has quite an appetite
for resources. Not everyone might need all the bells and whistles, so we are still investigating other options too. In
the end, there is no plan for have a single solution, but to allow integrating with more than one.

## Updating dependencies

Sounds boring? True! However, this time, we were a bit excited about that. To understand this, let's have a closer look
into Rust, its dependencies, and Tokio.

Rust follows a [semantic versioning](https://semver.org/) scheme. And a core dependency of many Rust applications that

> deal with I/O and need an asynchronous executor, is [tokio](https://tokio.rs/). Now, for a long time, tokio was released

Reviewer: ```suggestion
deal with I/O and need an asynchronous executor, is [tokio](https://tokio.rs/). A long time ago tokio was released
```

by definition. Also, due to the fact that Tokio provides an asynchronous executor, you cannot just mix 0.2 and 1.0
in a single application (that easily). On the bright side, the migration wasn't that difficult, and so may libraries
did this, and released new versions of themselves too.

With one exception, that was [actix](https://actix.rs/). We use actix for HTTP endpoints, and there are a bunch of
extensions on top of actix (like metrics, CORS, OAuth2), which make your life a lot easier. On the other side, e.g. the
asynchronous PostgreSQL driver was a thing we didn't want to miss. So we carefully curated our dependencies until
there was a beta version of actix-web, which supported tokio 1.0. So we migrated to that in the hope that, like most
other libraries, there would be a release soon, which would adopt tokio 1.0.

That was several Drogue Cloud releases back. Actix decided to do all kind of breaking changes too, because in the end,
the migration to tokio 1.0 also was a breaking change.

A few weeks back, actix-web 4 was finally released. And with that, most on-top features, like the Cloud Events SDK, too.

> Finally, we could drop a lot of carefully curated "beta" dependencies and git patches from out `Cargo.toml` files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, we could drop a lot of carefully curated "beta" dependencies and git patches from our `Cargo.toml` files.
```
